Chapter 1
How Emotionally 
Immature Parents 
Affect Their Adult 
Children’s Lives
Emotional loneliness comes from not having enough emotional 
intimacy with other people. It can start in childhood, due to 
feeling emotionally unseen by self-  preoccupied parents, or it can 
arise in adulthood when an emotional connection is lost. If it’s been a 
lifelong feeling, it points to the likelihood of not being sufficiently emo -
tionally responded to as a child.
Growing up in a family with emotionally immature parents is a lonely 
experience. These parents may look and act perfectly normal, caring for 
their child’s physical health and providing meals and safety. However, if 
they don’t make a solid emotional connection with their child, the child 
will have a gaping hole where true security might have been.
The loneliness of feeling unseen by others is as fundamental a pain as 
physical injury, but it doesn’t show on the outside. Emotional loneliness is 
a vague and private experience, not easy to see or describe. You might call 
it a feeling of emptiness or being alone in the world. Some people have 
called this feeling existential loneliness, but there’s nothing existential 
about it. If you feel it, it came from your family.
Children have no way of identifying a lack of emotional intimacy in 
their relationship with a parent. It isn’t a concept they have. And it’s even Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents8less likely that they can understand that their parents are emotionally 
immature. All they have is a gut feeling of emptiness, which is how a child 
experiences loneliness. With a mature parent, the child’s remedy for lone -
liness is simply to go to the parent for affectionate connection. But if your 
parent was scared of deep feelings, you might have been left with an uneasy 
sense of shame for needing comforting.
When the children of emotionally immature parents grow up, the 
core emptiness remains, even if they have a superficially normal adult life. 
Their loneliness can continue into adulthood if they unwittingly choose 
relationships that can’t give them enough emotional connection. They 
may go to school, work, marry, and raise children, but all the while they’ll 
still be haunted by that core sense of emotional isolation. In this chapter, 
we’ll look at people’s experience of emotional loneliness, along with how 
self- awareness helped them understand what they were missing and how 
to change.
Emotional Intimacy
Emotional intimacy involves knowing that you have someone you can tell 
anything to, someone to go to with all your feelings, about anything and 
everything. You feel completely safe opening up to the other person, 
whether in the form of words, through an exchange of looks, or by just 
being together quietly in a state of connection. Emotional intimacy is pro -
foundly fulfilling, creating a sense of being seen for who you really are. It 
can only exist when the other person seeks to know you, not judge you.
As children, the basis for our security is emotional connection with 
our caretakers. Emotionally engaged parents make children feel that they 
always have someone to go to. This kind of security requires genuine emo -
tional interactions with parents. Parents who are emotionally mature 
engage in this level of emotional connection almost all the time. They’ve 
developed enough self-  awareness to be comfortable with their own feel -
ings, as well as those of other people.
More importantly, they’re emotionally attuned to their children, 
noticing their children’s moods and welcoming their feelings with interest. 
A child feels safe connecting with such a parent, whether seeking comfort How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
9or sharing enthusiasm. Mature parents make their children feel that they 
enjoy engaging with them and that it’s fine to talk about emotional issues. 
These parents have a lively, balanced emotional life and are usually con -
sistent in their attentiveness and interest toward their children. They are 
emotionally dependable.
Emotional Loneliness
Parents who are emotionally immature, on the other hand, are so self- 
preoccupied that they don’t notice their children’s inner experiences. In 
addition, they discount feelings, and they fear emotional intimacy. They’re 
uncomfortable with their own emotional needs and therefore have no idea 
how to offer support at an emotional level. Such parents may even become 
nervous and angry if their children get upset, punishing them instead of 
comforting them. These reactions shut down children’s instinctive urge to 
reach out, closing the door to emotional contact.
If one or both of your parents weren’t mature enough to give you emo -
tional support, as a child you would have felt the effects of not having it, 
but you wouldn’t necessarily have known what was wrong. You might have 
thought that feeling empty and alone was your own private, strange expe -
rience, something that made you different from other people. As a child, 
you had no way of knowing that this hollow feeling is a normal, universal 
response to lacking adequate human companionship. “Emotional loneli -
ness” is a term that suggests its own cure: being on the receiving end of 
another person’s sympathetic interest in what you’re feeling. This type of 
loneliness isn’t an odd or senseless feeling; it’s the predictable result of 
growing up without sufficient empathy from others.
To round out this description of emotional loneliness, let’s look at two 
people who vividly remember this feeling from childhood and describe it 
well.
David’s Story
Here’s how my client David responded when I commented that 
growing up in his family sounded lonely: “It was incredibly lonely, 
like I was utterly isolated. It was a fact of my existence. It just felt Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents10normal. In my family, everyone was separate from each other, and 
we were all emotionally isolated. We lived parallel lives, with no 
points of contact. In high school, I used to get this image of floating 
in the ocean with no one around me. That’s how it felt at home.”
When I asked him more about the feeling of loneliness, he 
said, “It was a sensation of emptiness and nothingness. I had no 
way of knowing that most people didn’t feel that way. That feeling 
was just daily life for me.”
Rhonda’s Story
Rhonda remembered a similar aloneness when she was seven years 
old, standing by the moving truck outside her family’s old house 
with her parents and three older siblings. Although she was 
technically with her family, no one was touching her and she felt 
totally alone: “I was standing there with my family, but nobody 
had really explained what this move would mean. I felt totally 
alone, trying to figure out what was going on. I was with my 
family, but I didn’t feel like I was with them. I remember feeling 
exhausted, wondering how was I going to deal with this on my 
own. I didn’t feel like I could ask any questions. They were totally 
unavailable to me. I was too anxious to share anything with them. 
I knew it was on me to cope with this alone.”
The Message Within Emotional Loneliness
This kind of emotional pain and loneliness is actually a healthy 
message. The anxiety felt by David and Rhonda was letting them know 
that they were in dire need of emotional contact. But because their parents 
didn’t notice how they felt, all they could do was keep their feelings inside. 
Fortunately, once you start listening to your emotions instead of shutting 
them down, they will guide you toward an authentic connection with 
others. Knowing the cause of your emotional loneliness is the first step 
toward finding more fulfilling relationships.How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
11How Children Cope with 
Emotional Loneliness
Emotional loneliness is so distressing that a child who experiences it 
will do whatever is necessary to make some kind of connection with the 
parent. These children may learn to put other people’s needs first as the 
price of admission to a relationship. Instead of expecting others to provide 
support or show interest in them, they may take on the role of helping 
others, convincing everyone that they have few emotional needs of their 
own. Unfortunately, this tends to create even more loneliness, since cover -
ing up your deepest needs prevents genuine connection with others.
Lacking adequate parental support or connection, many emotionally 
deprived children are eager to leave childhood behind. They perceive that 
the best solution is to grow up quickly and become self-  sufficient. These 
children become competent beyond their years but lonely at their core. 
They often jump into adulthood prematurely, getting jobs as soon as they 
can, becoming sexually active, marrying early, or joining the service. It’s as 
though they’re saying, Since  I’m already taking care of myself, I might as well 
go ahead and get the benefits of growing up fast . They look forward to adult -
hood, believing it offers freedom and a chance to belong. Sadly, in their 
rush to leave home they may end up marrying the wrong person, tolerat -
ing exploitation, or staying with a job that takes more than it gives. They 
often settle for emotional loneliness in their relationships because it feels 
normal to them, like their early home life.
Why the Past Repeats Itself
If the lack of emotional connection with emotionally immature parents is 
so painful, why do so many people end up in similarly frustrating relation -
ships in adulthood? The most primitive parts of our brain tell us that safety 
lies in familiarity (Bowlby 1979). We gravitate to situations we have had 
experience with because we know how to deal with them. As children, we 
don’t recognize our parents’ limitations, because seeing our parents as 
immature or flawed is frightening. Unfortunately, by denying the painful 
truth about our parents, we aren’t able to recognize similarly hurtful people Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents12in future relationships. Denial makes us repeat the same situation over 
and over because we never see it coming the next time. Sophie’s story 
illustrates this dynamic well.
Sophie’s Story
Sophie had been dating Jerry for five years. She had a great job as 
a nurse and felt lucky to have a long-  term relationship. At thirty- 
two, she wanted to get married, but Jerry was in no hurry. In his 
mind, everything was fine the way it was. He was a fun guy, but 
he didn’t seem to want emotional intimacy and usually closed 
down when Sophie brought up emotional topics. Sophie was 
feeling deeply frustrated and sought therapy for help in figuring 
out what to do. It was a difficult dilemma: she loved Jerry, but she 
was running out of time to start a family. She also felt guilty and 
worried that she was asking for too much.
One day Jerry suggested that they go to the restaurant they 
had gone to on their first date. There was something about the 
way he asked that made Sophie wonder if he might propose. 
Sophie barely made it through dinner trying to contain her 
excitement.
Sure enough, after dinner Jerry pulled a small jewelry box out 
of his jacket pocket. As he pushed it across the linen tablecloth, 
Sophie could hardly breathe. But when she opened the box, there 
was no ring, only a small square of paper with a question mark on 
it. She didn’t understand.
Jerry grinned at her. “Now you can tell your friends I finally 
popped ‘the question’!”
“Are you proposing?” she asked in confusion.
“No, it’s a joke. Get it?”
Sophie was shocked, furious, and deeply hurt. When she 
called her mother and told her about the incident, her mother 
actually sided with Jerry, telling Sophie it was a funny joke and 
she shouldn’t be mad.How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
13I honestly cannot think of a single situation where this would 
be a good joke in a relationship. It’s too deflating and demeaning. 
But as Sophie recognized later, her mother and Jerry had a lot in 
common in their insensitivity to people’s feelings. Every time 
Sophie tried to tell them how she felt, she ended up feeling 
invalidated.
In therapy, Sophie began to see the parallels between her 
mother’s lack of empathy and Jerry’s emotional insensitivity. She 
realized that in her relationship with Jerry, she had reentered the 
emotional loneliness she’d felt as a child. She now saw that her 
frustration with Jerry’s emotional unavailability wasn’t something 
new; it was as old as her childhood. Sophie had felt that sense of 
unconnnectedness her whole life.
Feeling Guilty for Being Unhappy
I have a special place in my heart for people like Sophie, who function so 
well that other people think they have no problems. In fact, their compe -
tence makes it hard for them to take their own pain seriously. “I have it 
all,” they’re likely to say. “I should be happy. Why do I feel so miserable?” 
This is the classic confusion of a person whose physical needs were met in 
childhood while emotional needs remained unfulfilled.
People like Sophie often feel guilty for complaining. Men and women 
alike will list the things they have to be thankful for, as if their life were 
an addition problem whose positive sum means nothing can be wrong. But 
they can’t shake the feeling of being fundamentally alone and lacking the 
level of emotional intimacy they crave in their closest relationships.
By the time they come to see me, some of them are either ready to 
leave their partner or are involved in an affair that gives them some of 
what they need. Others have avoided romantic relationships altogether, 
seeing emotional commitment as a trap they prefer to stay out of. Still 
others have decided to stay in their relationship for their children and 
come to therapy for help in learning how to be less angry and resentful.Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents14Few of these people walk into my office with the thought that their 
lack of satisfying emotional intimacy started in childhood. They are 
usually mystified as to how they ended up in a life that doesn’t make them 
happy. They struggle with feelings of selfishness for wanting something 
more out of life. As Sophie initially said, “Relationships are always going 
to have frustrations. It’s work, right?”
She was partly right. Good relationships do take some effort and for -
bearance. But it shouldn’t take work just to be noticed. Making an emo -
tional connection ought to be the easy part.
Emotional Loneliness 
Transcends Gender
Although women still outnumber men in seeking psychotherapy, I’ve 
worked with many men who have faced the same issue of feeling lonely in 
their primary relationship. In some ways, it’s even more poignant for them 
because our culture maintains that males have fewer emotional needs. But 
taking a look at the rates of suicide and violence reveals that this isn’t true. 
Men are more likely to become violent or succeed at suicide when they feel 
emotionally anguished. Men who lack emotional intimacy, a sense of 
belonging, or caring attention can feel as empty as anybody else, though 
they may resist showing it. Emotional connection is a basic human need, 
regardless of gender.
Children who feel they cannot engage their parents emotionally often 
try to strengthen their connection by playing whatever roles they believe 
their parents want them to. Although this may win them some fleeting 
approval, it doesn’t yield genuine emotional closeness. Emotionally discon -
nected parents don’t suddenly develop a capacity for empathy just because 
a child does something to please them.
People who lacked emotional engagement in childhood, men and 
women alike, often can’t believe that someone would want to have a rela -
tionship with them just because of who they are. They believe that if they 
want closeness, they must play a role that always puts the other person 
first.How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
15Jake’s Story
Jake had recently married Kayla, a bubbly woman who made 
him feel genuinely loved. He was happy when he got married, 
but now he couldn’t shake a feeling of being very down in the 
dumps. “I should be happy,” he said, “I’m the luckiest guy in the 
world, and I’m trying hard to be the person she wants me to be. 
But I feel like I’m acting , forcing myself to be more upbeat than 
I really am. I hate feeling like I’m faking it.”
I asked Jake who he thought he should be with Kayla.
“I should be a person who is super happy, like she is. I need 
to make her feel loved and keep her happy. That’s the way it’s 
supposed to be.” He looked at me expectantly for confirmation, 
but when I just waited, he went on: “When she comes home from 
work, I try hard to act really happy and excited, but it’s more 
than I’m really feeling. I’m exhausted.”
I asked him what he thought would happen if he were to 
honestly tell Kayla about the strain he felt, and he said, “She 
would be devastated and furious if I tried to talk to her about it.”
I told Jake that I believed sharing his honest feelings might 
have enraged someone in his past, but it didn’t sound like how 
Kayla would respond. It sounded more like what he had told me 
about his angry mother, who was quick to blow up if people 
didn’t do what she wanted.
Jake’s secure relationship with Kayla was tempting him to 
relax and be himself, but he was sure that his relationship would 
suffer if he stopped trying so hard.
When I told Jake that maybe this safe new relationship was 
giving him a chance to finally be loved for himself, he was 
uncomfortable with the reference to his emotional needs. He 
looked embarrassed and said, “When you say it like that, I sound 
pitiful and needy.”
During childhood, Jake had gotten the message from his 
mother that showing any emotional needs meant he was weak. Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents16Further, if he didn’t act how she wanted him to, he felt inadequate 
and unlovable.
Jake was eventually able to understand his feelings and 
become more genuine with Kayla, who totally accepted him. 
But he was astounded by how much anger toward his mother 
we’d unearthed. “I can’t believe how much I hated her,” he said. 
What Jake didn’t realize is that hate is a normal and involuntary 
reaction when somebody tries to control you for no good reason. 
It signals that the person is extinguishing your emotional life 
force by getting his or her needs met at your expense.
Feeling Trapped in Taking Care 
of Parents
It isn’t only in romantic relationships that people may feel deep emotional 
loneliness. I’ve worked with single people who have similar stories, but 
their unhappy adult relationships are played out with parents or friends. 
Typically, their relationships with their parents are so draining that they 
don’t have the emotional energy to pursue romantic relationships, nor do 
they want to. Their experiences with their parents have taught them that 
relationships mean feeling abandoned and burdened at the same time. To 
these people, relationships feel like traps. They already have their hands 
full with a parent who acts like he or she owns them.
Louise’s Story
Louise, a single schoolteacher in her late twenties, felt completely 
dominated by her controlling mother, a gruff ex-  policewoman who 
expected Louise to live with her and take care of her. Her 
demands were so excessive that Louse started having suicidal 
thoughts. Louise’s therapist told her in no uncertain terms that 
her life depended on getting away from her mother’s control. 
When Louise told her mother she was leaving, her mother said, How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
17“That’s not going to happen. You’d feel awful about yourself. 
Besides, I can’t get along without you.” Fortunately, Louise 
summoned the strength to establish her own, independent life. In 
the process, she discovered that guilt was a manageable emotion, 
and a small price to pay for her freedom.
Not Trusting Your Instincts
Emotionally immature parents don’t know how to validate their child’s 
feelings and instincts. Without this validation, children learn to give in to 
what others seem sure about. As adults, they may deny their instincts to 
the point where they acquiesce to relationships they don’t really want. 
They may then believe it’s up to them to make the relationship work. They 
may rationalize why they have to try so hard in the relationship, as though 
it were normal to struggle daily to get along with your mate. While effort 
is needed to maintain communication and connection in a relationship, it 
shouldn’t feel like constant, unrewarding work.
The truth is, if both partners fit each other, understand each other’s 
feelings, and are positive and supportive, relationships are primarily plea -
surable, not arduous. It isn’t asking too much to generally feel happy when 
you see your partner or look forward to time together. When people say, 
“You can’t have everything,” they’re really saying they don’t have what 
they need.
As a human being, you can trust yourself to know when you’re emo -
tionally satisfied. You know when you’ve been given full measure. You 
aren’t a bottomless pits of ceaseless demands. You can trust the inner 
prompts that tell you when something is missing.
But if you’ve been trained to discount your feelings, you’ll feel guilty 
for complaining if everything looks okay on the outside. If you have a 
place to live, a regular paycheck, enough food, and a partner or friends, 
conventional wisdom says, “How bad can it be?”
Many people can readily enumerate all the reasons why they should be 
satisfied and be shy about admitting that they aren’t. They blame them -
selves for not having the “right” feelings.Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents18Meaghan’s Story
Meaghan broke up with her boyfriend twice before getting 
pregnant in her first year of college. Although her boyfriend 
wanted to get married, the relationship just didn’t feel right to her. 
However, her parents were crazy about her boyfriend, who came 
from a wealthy family, and pushed her to marry him, especially 
with a baby on the way, and Meaghan gave in. Her husband 
became a successful real estate broker, adding to his appeal for her 
parents. Years later, with three children finally in college, she was 
ready to end her marriage, but she felt confused and guilty about 
wanting to leave.
In our first session, Meaghan said, “I don’t know how to 
express myself.” Neither her husband nor her parents could 
understand why she wasn’t satisfied with the way things were, and 
she couldn’t find the words to defend her feelings. For every 
explanation she stumbled through, they countered with several 
reasons why she was wrong. They discounted her reasons because 
her complaints were emotional, like not being listened to, having 
her feelings and requests disregarded, and not having any fun with 
her husband. She tried to explain to them that she and her 
husband weren’t compatible socially, sexually, or in their activities.
Meaghan’s real problem wasn’t that she didn’t know how to 
express herself; it was that her family didn’t want to hear her. Her 
husband and parents weren’t trying to understand; they were 
focused on trying to convince her she was mistaken.
Meaghan felt embarrassed and guilty because her emotional 
needs were outweighing her vows and commitments. But as I pointed 
out to her, vows and promises aren’t the fuel relationships run on. 
Relationship are sustained by the pleasure of emotional intimacy,  
the feeling that someone is interested in taking the time to really 
listen and understand your experience. If you don’t have that, your 
relationship won’t thrive. Mutual emotional responsiveness is the 
single most essential ingredient of human relationships.
Meaghan feared she was a bad person for wanting to leave her 
husband. When people can no longer tolerate an emotionally How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
19unrewarding relationship, how should we characterize their desire 
to leave? Are they being selfish, impulsive, or hard-  hearted? Are 
they giving up prematurely, or perhaps being just plain immoral? If 
they’ve taken it all this time, why can’t they take it a little more? 
Why rock the boat?
The point might exactly be that they have taken it for so long. 
Perhaps they’ve literally used up all the energy they had to give, 
like Meaghan, who had spent years trying to give her husband 
and parents what they expected. Meaghan had repeatedly tried to 
explain her feelings and tell them how unhappy she was. She even 
tried to get through to her husband by leaving him letters to read. 
But neither he nor her parents listened. Instead, they responded 
with what they wanted her to do—  the classic egocentric response 
of emotionally immature people.
Fortunately, Meaghan finally began to take her own feelings 
seriously and quit letting her husband and parents deny her 
emotional needs with arguments that were emotionally irrelevant 
to her. When Meaghan finally realized what she really wanted 
from a relationship, she shyly told me, “I want to matter the most 
to someone. I want someone to want to be with me.” Then she 
looked confused and said, “Is that too much to ask? I really don’t 
know.” Since childhood, Meaghan had been trained to think that 
her natural desire to feel special and loved was selfish. 
Throughout her marriage, her husband reinforced this by telling 
her that she wanted too much and her expectations were too 
high—  until she stopped believing that he knew more about her 
than she did.
Lacking Self-  Confidence Due to 
Parental Rejection
When parents reject or emotionally neglect their children, these children 
often grow up to expect the same from other people. They lack confidence 
that others could be interested in them. Instead of asking for what they Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents20want, their low self-  confidence makes them shy and conflicted about 
seeking attention. They’re convinced they would be bothering others if 
they tried to make their needs known. Unfortunately, by expecting past 
rejection to repeat itself, these children end up stifling themselves and 
promoting more emotional loneliness.
In this situation, people create their own emotional loneliness by 
hanging back instead of interacting. As a therapist, my job is to help them 
realize how their parents have damaged their self-  confidence while also 
encouraging them to tolerate the anxiety of trying something new in order 
to connect more with others. As the next two stories show, people are 
capable of doing this; it just may not occur to them to reach out because 
they simply don’t have much experience with other people helping them 
feel better.
Ben’s Story
Ben had suffered from anxiety and depression for much of his life. 
He characterized his mother as a rejecting woman who kept him at 
arm’s length. She was imperious and had made it clear that he held 
a low place in the family pecking order. As a child, Ben’s needs and 
feelings simply weren’t a primary concern, and he was expected to 
wait until the adults were ready to pay attention to him.
Fortunately, Ben married a kind and affectionate woman, 
Alexa. But he was baffled as to why she had chosen him. As he 
put it, “I’m not a very interesting person. I don’t know why Alexa 
likes me. I’m not exactly a nobody, but…” The way Ben’s voice 
trailed off indicated that he saw himself as someone who could 
easily be overlooked and taken for granted. Ben’s childhood 
experience of his mother’s rejection had clearly deflated his 
self- confidence. Further, it had convinced him that others would 
find his emotional needs as repugnant as his mother had.
One day in session, Ben talked about how unhappy and 
overwhelmed he was feeling. When I asked if he’d confided in 
Alexa about how he was feeling, he said, “No, I can’t. She’s got 
her own stuff to deal with. I don’t want her to see me as this wuss How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
21who can’t deal with his own issues.” When I said it seemed 
unlikely Alexa would do that, he agreed: “I know she loves me for 
just being myself. But I don’t feel that way about myself.”
When I suggested to Ben that he could try opening up to 
Alexa, given how supportive she was, he told me he thought he 
should be more self-  reliant, saying, “I should be able to weather this 
on my own. Isn’t it up to me to meet my own emotional needs?”
What a lonely thought. I told Ben that we all need other 
people to meet our emotional needs for comfort and closeness. 
That’s what relationships are all about.
Charlotte’s Story
Charlotte provides another example of this tendency to see 
current situations through the lens of past parental rejection. She 
had finally accepted a friend’s repeated invitations to enter a short 
story in a writing contest. She was sure the judges would reject her 
work, even though she was a successful newspaper journalist. To 
her astonishment, she won.
For Charlotte, this stirred up painful memories of all the 
times in childhood when she was criticized and shamed by her 
parents for trying to stand out. Her parents weren’t capable of 
emotional support and instead found reasons to disparage her 
accomplishments. Now, even as she was thrilled about her award, 
she simultaneously felt terrified that someone would step forward 
to mock her or expose her as undeserving. Instead of sharing her 
happiness with everyone, she kept it to herself, telling herself no 
one was interested.
Childhood Loneliness Beneath 
Adult Success
Parental rejection doesn’t always result in low self-  confidence. Some intel -
ligent, resilient people somehow manifest the confidence to pursue good Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents22careers and reach high levels of achievement. Many find emotionally 
mature partners, enjoy satisfying long-  term relationships, and create close 
families of their own. But despite their emotional needs being met in 
current relationships, the lingering trauma of childhood loneliness may 
haunt them in other ways, through anxiety, depression, or bad dreams.
Natalie’s Story
Natalie, fifty, an award-  winning business consultant, was an 
emotionally neglected child who nevertheless created a rewarding 
adult life for herself both personally and professionally. 
Unfortunately, the emotional neglect she experienced as a child 
still haunts her in the form of dreams, which she described like 
this: “I have recurring nightmares with the same theme. I’m in a 
desperate situation that I can’t get out of. I’m trying frantically to 
find a solution, a way out. Different roads, different keys, different 
doors—  none of them are a solution. I’m all alone, and there’s only 
me trying to solve the problem; there’s no one else. Lots of times 
I’m responsible for other people who are watching and waiting for 
me to fix everything, but here they give me no help. There is no 
comfort to be found. I have no protection and I’m not safe. Then I 
wake up and my heart is racing.”
Natalie’s dream captures what it feels like to be emotionally 
alone. She has to deal with everything by herself and doesn’t 
consider asking anyone for help. This is how children of 
emotionally immature parents feel. Their parents may technically 
be present, but they offer little help, protection, or comfort.
In her family life, Natalie still takes care of her elderly mother, 
who lives with Natalie and her husband and kids. But no matter 
how much Natalie does, her mother still complains that Natalie 
has never loved her or helped her enough. Since childhood, 
Natalie has felt the responsibility for her mother’s emotional state. 
Meanwhile, Natalie was on her own because her mother wasn’t a 
person she could turn to. Children like Natalie often grow up as 
little adults, helping their parents, giving them no trouble, and How EI Parents Affect Their Adult Children’s Lives 
23appearing to need practically nothing. These capable kids may 
seem like they can parent themselves, but they can’t. No child 
can. They just learn to cling to whatever emotional scraps they get 
because any connection is better than none at all.
Yet who would guess Natalie’s early insecurities as she strides 
into meetings, all business in her impeccable suits? She has a good 
marriage, successful children, and close friendships. She knows 
how to relate to people from all walks of life, and her emotional 
intelligence is off the charts. Natalie’s dreams pull back the 
curtain to reveal the emotional loneliness that remains within her. 
Despite creating a fulfilling adult life, inside she remains 
vulnerable to anxieties about being alone and unsupported. Not 
until she was nearly fifty did she begin to understand how her 
relationship with her mother fueled her underlying feelings of 
anxiety. That was one of the most meaningful discoveries of her 
life. Finally, she saw the reason for those nightmares.
Why It Feels So Bad to Live Without 
Emotional Connection
There’s a reason why people have such a strong need for emotional con -
nection with others. Throughout human evolution, being part of a group 
has always meant more safety and less stress. Our ancestors who most 
disliked separation were more likely to survive because they enjoyed the 
safe feeling of being close to others. Early humans who didn’t mind isola -
tion, on the other hand, may have been comfortable with more distance 
than was good for their survival.
So when you’re longing for a deep emotional connection, remind 
yourself that your painful feeling of aloneness is coming not just from your 
individual history, but also from human genetic memory. Just like you, our 
distant ancestors had a strong need for emotional closeness. Your need for 
attention and connection is as old as the human race. You have prehistoric 
reasons for not liking to be lonely.Adult Children of Emotionally Immature Parents24Summary
A lack of emotional intimacy creates emotional loneliness in both chil -
dren and adults. Attentive and reliable emotional relationships are the 
basis of a child’s sense of security. Unfortunately, emotionally immature 
parents are usually too uncomfortable with closeness to give their children 
the deep emotional connection they need. Parental neglect and rejection 
in childhood can adversely affect self-  confidence and relationships in 
adulthood, as people repeat old, frustrating patterns and then blame 
themselves for not being happy. Even adult success doesn’t completely 
erase the effects of parental disconnection earlier in life.
Understanding how your parent’s emotional immaturity has affected 
you is the best way to avoid repeating the past in your adult relationships. 
To that end, in the next chapter we’ll look at the hallmark characteristics 
of emotionally immature parents.
